v8.0.0-alpha.13 (#16684)
mui/mui-x: CHANGELOG.md

Reviewer: We'll need to merge one more breaking change PR for the Data Grid, I'll update this PR when it's ready

Author: I does not hurt to release a last apha and let the next week to be sure no more breaking changes are needed

Reviewer 2: I wouldn't mind as well. 🤔 
After all, I would like to merge another small-ish BC: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/16678

Reviewer 3: @joserodolfofreitas

- [charts] Decouple `margin` and `axis-size` (#16418) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Fix default label measurement being off (#16635) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Fix typo in error message (#16641) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Improve axis size docs (#16673) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Improve performance of rendering ticks in x-axis (#16536) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Make `defaultizeAxis` function type-safe (#16642) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Make `series.data` readonly (#16645) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Make array inputs readonly (#16632) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Remove state initialization hack (#16520) @alexfauquette
- [charts] Fix scroll overflow on mobile (#16675) @oliviertassinari

#### `@mui/x-charts-pro@8.0.0-beta.0` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-tree-view@8.0.0-beta.0`, plus:

- [charts-pro] Add back zoom control (#16550) @alexfauquette

### Tree View

#### `@mui/x-tree-view@8.0.0-beta.0`

Internal changes.

#### `@mui/x-tree-view-pro@8.0.0-beta.0` [![pro](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg)](https://mui.com/r/x-pro-svg-link 'Pro plan')

Same changes as in `@mui/x-tree-view@8.0.0-beta.0`.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### `@mui/x-codemod@8.0.0-beta.0`

- [codemod] Improve Pickers renaming codemod (#16685) @LukasTy

```

### Docs

> - [docs] Fix migration guide introduction for charts (#16679) @alexfauquette

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [docs] Fix migration guide introduction for charts (#16679) @alexfauquette
- [docs] Improve Pickers migration page (#16682) @LukasTy
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 8.0.0-beta.0

> _Feb 24, 2025_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
_Feb 25, 2025_
```

> We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 13 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 14 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:
```

- 🔧 End of alpha and all its breaking changes 🎉
- 📊 Decouple `margin` and `axis-size`. A new API that enable multiple axis (#16418) @JCQuintas

> - 🗺️ Added Bangla (bn-BD) locale

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- 🗺️ Added Bangla (bn-BD) locale
- 🗺️ Improve Russian (ru-RU) locale on the Data Grid
```

Special thanks go out to the community contributors who have helped make this release possible:

> @lhilgert9, @officialkidmax.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
@lhilgert9, @officialkidmax, @denpiligrim.
```

  There is also a `createRowSelectionManager` utility function that can be used to manage the row selection:

  ```ts
  const rowSelectionManager = createRowSelectionManager({
    type: 'include',
    ids: new Set(),
  });
  rowSelectionManager.select(rowId);
  rowSelectionManager.unselect(rowId);
  rowSelectionManager.has(rowId);
  ```

- The `selectedIdsLookupSelector` selector has been removed. Use the `gridRowSelectionManagerSelector` or `gridRowSelectionStateSelector` selectors instead.
- The `selectedGridRowsSelector` has been renamed to `gridRowSelectionIdsSelector`.
- The `selectedGridRowsCountSelector` has been renamed to `gridRowSelectionCountSelector`.
- The `showToolbar` prop is now required to display the toolbar.

  It is no longer necessary to pass `GridToolbar` as a slot to display the default toolbar.

  ```diff
   <DataGrid
  +  showToolbar
  -  slots={{
  -    toolbar: GridToolbar,
  -  }}
   />
  ```

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-beta.0`

- [DataGrid] Column Visibility: Update "Reset" button behavior (#16626) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Column management design updates (#16630) @KenanYusuf
- [DataGrid] Fix scrollbar overlapping cells on mount (#16639) @KenanYusuf

> - [DataGrid] Fix: base Select menuprops onClose (#16643) @romgrk

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Fix: base Select menuprops onClose (#16643) @romgrk
- [DataGrid] Use readonly array for GridSortModel (#16627) @pcorpet
```

  +      position: 'right',
       },
     ]}
   >
  -  <ChartsYAxis axisId="my-axis" position="right" />
  +  <ChartsYAxis axisId="my-axis" />
   </ChartContainer>
  ```

- Add `minTickLabelGap` to x-axis, which allows users to define the minimum gap, in pixels, between two tick labels. The default value is 4px. Make sure to check your charts as the spacing between tick labels might have changed.

#### `@mui/x-charts@8.0.0-beta.0`

- [charts] Add `minTickLabelGap` to x-axis (#16548) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Add unit test for pie chart with empty series (#16663) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Decouple `margin` and `axis-size` (#16418) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Fix default label measurement being off (#16635) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Fix typo in error message (#16641) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Improve axis size docs (#16673) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Improve performance of rendering ticks in x-axis (#16536) @bernardobelchior
- [charts] Make `defaultizeAxis` function type-safe (#16642) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Make `series.data` readonly (#16645) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Make array inputs readonly (#16632) @JCQuintas
- [charts] Remove state initialization hack (#16520) @alexfauquette

> - [charts] Fix scroll overflow on mobile (#16675) @oliviertassinari

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- [charts] Fix scroll overflow on mobile (#16675) @oliviertassinari
- [charts] Accept component in `labelMarkType` (#16739) @bernardobelchior 
- [charts] Remove redundant default axis (#16734) @bernardobelchior 
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 8.0.0-alpha.13

> _Feb 27, 2025_

Author: ```suggestion
_Feb 28, 2025_
```

  ```diff
   <DataGrid
  -  unstable_onDataSourceError={(error: Error, params: GridGetRowsParams) => {
  -    if (params.filterModel) {
  -      // do something
  -    }
  -  }}
  +  unstable_onDataSourceError={(error: GridGetRowsError | GridUpdateRowError) => {
  +    if (error instanceof GridGetRowsError && error.params.filterModel) {
  +      // do something
  +    }
  +  }}
   />
  ```

- Fix the type of the `GridSortModel` to allow readonly arrays.

- `GridSortItem` interface is not exported anymore.

- The `showToolbar` prop is now required to display the toolbar.

  It is no longer necessary to pass `GridToolbar` as a slot to display the default toolbar.

  ```diff
   <DataGrid
  +  showToolbar
  -  slots={{
  -    toolbar: GridToolbar,
  -  }}
   />
  ```

#### `@mui/x-data-grid@8.0.0-alpha.13`

- [DataGrid] Add `showToolbar` prop to enable default toolbar (#16687) @KenanYusuf
- [DataGrid] Column Visibility: Update "Reset" button behavior (#16626) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Column management design updates (#16630) @KenanYusuf
- [DataGrid] Fix `showColumnVerticalBorder` prop (#16715) @KenanYusuf
- [DataGrid] Fix scrollbar overlapping cells on mount (#16639) @KenanYusuf

> - [DataGrid] Fix: base Select menuprops onClose (#16643) @romgrk

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Fix: base `Select` menuprops `onClose()` (#16643) @romgrk
```

- [DataGrid] Make `GridSortItem` internal (#16732) @arminmeh
- [DataGrid] Make data source stable (#16710) @MBilalShafi
- [DataGrid] Reshape row selection model (#15651) @cherniavskii
- [DataGrid] Replace `sx` prop usage with `styled()` components (#16665) @KenanYusuf

> - [DataGrid] Refactor: create base Autocomplete (#16390) @romgrk

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [DataGrid] Refactor: create base `Autocomplete` (#16390) @romgrk
```

All notable changes to this project will be documented in this file.
See [Conventional Commits](https://conventionalcommits.org) for commit guidelines.

## 8.0.0-beta.0

_Feb 27, 2025_

We'd like to offer a big thanks to the 18 contributors who made this release possible. Here are some highlights ✨:

- 🔧 End of alpha and all its breaking changes 🎉

> - 📊 Decouple `margin` and `axis-size`. A new API that enable multiple axis (#16418) @JCQuintas

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- 📊 Decouple `margin` and `axis-size`. A new API to support multiple axes (#16418) @JCQuintas
```

- 🗺️ Added Bangla (bn-BD) locale
- 🗺️ Improve Russian (ru-RU) and Hungarian (hu-HU) locale on the Data Grid

> Special thanks go out to the community contributors who have helped make this release possible:

Reviewer 6: This feels redundant. I'll update the action later, but could you please change that?

```suggestion
Special thanks go out to the community members for their contributions:
```

Reviewer 6: https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/16751 ^^

@denpiligrim, @lhilgert9, @noherczeg, @officialkidmax, @pcorpet.
Following are all team members who have contributed to this release:
@alexfauquette, @arminmeh, @bernardobelchior, @cherniavskii, @flaviendelangle, @hasdfa, @Janpot, @JCQuintas, @KenanYusuf, @LukasTy, @MBilalShafi, @oliviertassinari, @romgrk.

<!--/ HIGHLIGHT_ABOVE_SEPARATOR /-->

### Data Grid

#### Breaking changes

- The `slots.baseFormControl` component was removed.

> - The "Reset" button in the column visibility panel now resets to the initial column visibility model instead of the model when the panel was opened. The reset behavior follows these rules:

Reviewer 6: Sentence feels a bit long. Mind splitting it up?

```suggestion
- The "Reset" button in the column visibility panel now resets to the initial column visibility model. Previously it was reset to the model that was active at the time the panel was opened. The reset behavior follows these rules:
```

- The `selectedGridRowsSelector` has been renamed to `gridRowSelectionIdsSelector`.
- The `selectedGridRowsCountSelector` has been renamed to `gridRowSelectionCountSelector`.

- The data source feature and its related props are now stable.

  ```diff
   <DataGridPro
  -  unstable_dataSource={dataSource}
  -  unstable_dataSourceCache={cache}
  -  unstable_lazyLoading
  -  unstable_lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs={100}
  +  dataSource={dataSource}
  +  dataSourceCache={cache}
  +  lazyLoading
  +  lazyLoadingRequestThrottleMs={100}
   />
  ```

- The data source API is now stable.

  ```diff
  - apiRef.current.unstable_dataSource.getRows()
  + apiRef.current.dataSource.getRows()
  ```

- The signature of `unstable_onDataSourceError()` has been updated to support future use-cases.

  ```diff
   <DataGrid
  -  unstable_onDataSourceError={(error: Error, params: GridGetRowsParams) => {
  -    if (params.filterModel) {
  -      // do something
  -    }
  -  }}
  +  unstable_onDataSourceError={(error: GridGetRowsError | GridUpdateRowError) => {
  +    if (error instanceof GridGetRowsError && error.params.filterModel) {
  +      // do something
  +    }
  +  }}
   />
  ```

> - Fix the type of the GridSortModel to allow readonly arrays.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Fix the type of the `GridSortModel` to allow readonly arrays.
```
